The National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institute on Aging (NIA), National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD), National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA),
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), and the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) invite applications to investigate sleep deprivation in health and
illness. The goal of this program announcement is to stimulate clinical and
applied research on behavioral, psychosocial and physiological consequences of
acute and chronic partial sleep deprivation in either chronically ill or
healthy individuals and to develop environmental, clinical management, and
other interventions with the potential to reduce sleep disturbances and
significantly improve the health of large numbers of people. Although sleep
disorders are a cause of sleep loss in affected individuals, the questions to
be addressed under this solicitation should focus on causes and consequences
of sleep deprivation, apart from any sleep pathology.
Background
Inadequate sleep or nonrestorative sleep has major implications for public
health, safety, productivity, and well-being. It has been estimated that more
than 60 million Americans, or approximately one in three adults, experience
inadequate sleep that can interfere with daily activities. In fact, the
report of the National Commission on Sleep Disorders Research concluded that
inadequate sleep is such a pervasive problem that it appears to be accepted as
a normal part of life. Excessive sleepiness has been associated with
accidents at work or at home, and at least three percent of serious automobile
accidents and fatalities are due to a fatigued driver. Accidents occurring as
a result of sleep deprivation have major implications for public health and
safety. In addition, partial and chronic sleep deprivation adversely affects
individual job performance and quality of life. The NIH National Sleep
Disorders Research Plan identified research needed in basic, clinical and
applied areas. The basic and clinical areas of research have been the focus
of other initiatives.
The current program announcement focuses on the applied research areas; the
sleep-related problems found in healthy and chronically ill individuals who
have acute and chronic partial sleep deprivation. Partial chronic sleep
deprivation in healthy individuals is primarily due to external demands as
found in shift workers, medical students, nurses and working parents. In
addition, sleep deprivation may be due to lifestyle choices as made by teens
and young adults. Little is known about the consequences of sleep deprivation
on quality of life and measures of behavioral, cognitive and psychosocial
function.
There are many chronic health conditions that interfere with sleep. Sleep
disturbances are associated with Alzheimer’s Disease and other dementias,
rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, AIDS, cancer, neurodegenerative disorders,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, cardiovascular disease, urinary
incontinence, drug abuse (as well as withdrawal from drug abuse) and chronic
alcoholism. Sleep deprivation can be exacerbated by pain and by environmental
conditions associated with hospitalization and home care that are not
conducive to restorative sleep. Sleep deprivation can also increase the risk
of depression in chronically ill individuals. Research is needed on sleep
deprivation associated with medical disorders, and their link to other mental
disorders, symptoms, and related disabilities.
Little is known about sleep deprivation in children. A vast majority of
children complain about feeling tired during the day and 15 percent of
children have reported falling asleep during school at least once. Acute and
chronic partial sleep deprivation in children has been associated with
decreased cognitive functioning and school performance. Sleep deprivation may
also be a risk factor for poor behavioral adjustment and behavioral problems
such as attention deficit disorder. The potential consequences of sleep
deprivation on behavior and growth across the different stages of development
has not been well characterized.
It has been estimated that over half of the 33 million adults over 65 years of
age have some chronic sleep complaint which contributes to personal discomfort
and illness, to caregiver burden, and to overall health care costs. Elderly
individuals without sleep disorders may experience sleep disruption due to
factors associated with the institutional care environment and/or poor sleep
hygiene practices.
The etiology of sleep deprivation (i.e., shift work, environmental conditions,
lifestyle, chronic illness, medical treatment related effects) needs to be
determined and specific at-risk populations with adverse health consequences
need to be identified, apart from sleep disorders. Research is also needed to
identify interventions (e.g., light therapy, behavioral interventions) to
improve the quality of sleep in healthy and chronically ill individuals.
Treatment approaches using sleep deprivation or phase shifting as an
intervention for mental disorders in patients of any age is also an area of
interest.
Listed below are examples of studies that would be responsive to this program
announcement. However, these are only illustrative examples and applicants
are encouraged to propose other topics consistent with the goals of this
program. Not all areas are required in a single application.
Identify specific chronically ill populations at increased risk (e.g.,
Alzheimer’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, cardiopulmonary disease, cancer
survivors, patients with alcohol problems) of chronic partial sleep
deprivation and identify the etiology of excessive daytime sleepiness, apart
from sleep disorders within these populations
Identify factors contributing to sleep deprivation (e.g., shift work,
occupational demands, environmental conditions, alcohol and drug use,
lifestyle choices, stress, medical treatment sequelae) and whether age,
gender, and ethnicity may play a role
Determine the physiological, cognitive, behavioral, and psychosocial risks
associated with varying lengths of sleep deprivation for both acute and
chronic partial sleep deprivation in children, adolescents and adults
Elucidate the role of evening or bedtime alcohol use in sleep deprivation,
and investigate the contribution of sleep deprivation to risk-taking behaviors
such as drug and alcohol consumption
Identify effective recovery patterns following chronic partial sleep loss
and whether rates of recovery vary by age and/or for physiological, behavioral
and cognitive processes
Determine the restorative function of sleep in maintenance of health
Determine the relationship between menopause (natural or medically induced)
and sleep disturbances
Develop interventions to improve the quality of sleep and to prevent sleep
deprivation from occurring in healthy and chronically ill individuals across
the lifespan including neonates, children, adolescents, adults, and older
persons
Identify strategies to help children and adults adapt to the sleep
disturbance associated with hospitals, critical care settings, and nursing
homes
Develop and use improved approaches to assess acute and chronic sleep
deprivation
Determine whether measurements of sleep quality can predict response to
treatment of alcoholism and mental disorders across the life cycle
Determine how sleep patterns are affected by alcohol and psychoactive drug
use and how the withdrawal from alcohol and drug use affects sleep patterns
Identify the relationship between partial sleep deprivation in children and
adolescents and the relationship to possible effects on learning and behavior
problems
Determine whether different stages of development alter the consequences of
sleep deprivation in children and/or whether sleep is required for adequate
growth and development